[FLINK-12998][docs] Update documentation for file systems loading as plugins (#9169)
apache/flink: docs/ops/filesystems/index.md

* This will be replaced by the TOC
{:toc}

## Local File System

Flink has built-in support for the file system of the local machine, including any NFS or SAN drives mounted into that local file system.
It can be used by default without additional configuration. Local files are referenced with the *file://* URI scheme.

## Pluggable File Systems

> Apache Flink project supports the following file systems as plugins:

Reviewer: do we have any reference _anywhere_ what a plugin is in the context of Flink?

Author: No, we don't have it, not yet. In this document, there is a follow up description that tells that those file systems should be copied under `plugins` dir before Flink startup to enable them.

Although, the referenced ticket focuses on documenting the plugins mechanism, I've focused mostly on updating file systems setup docs. My reasoning is the following:
 * currently only file system components are used by the plugins mechanism. Imo, it's fine for now to not have a dedicated documentation page for plugins in general. Also, there is not much to say to users about plugins mechanism, besides which Java interface it's and that they are loaded from `plugins` dir;
 * it's possible that the plugin mechanism/lifecycle may change in the future, when it's applied to other Flink components.

My proposal would be to wait when there are more use cases of plugins and when it's more refined. At the moment, I find it's scope too small to document as a separate section.

  - [**Amazon S3**](./s3.html) object storage is supported by two alternative implementations, `flink-s3-fs-presto` and `flink-s3-fs-hadoop`.
  Both implementations are self-contained with no dependency footprint.

  - **MapR FS**: The MapR file system *maprfs://* is automatically available when the MapR libraries are in the classpath.

>   <span class="label label-info">Note</span> You'd need to build from sources the `flink-mapr-fs` JAR file. 

Reviewer: This should be incorrect; the flink-mapr-fs files are contained in the flink-dist jar. As such building the jar should not be necessary; it isn't doing any packaging.

  The implementation is based on the [Hadoop Project](https://hadoop.apache.org/) but is self-contained with no dependency footprint.
  To use it when using Flink as a library, add the respective maven dependency (`org.apache.flink:flink-swift-fs-hadoop:{{ site.version }}`).
  
  - **[Aliyun Object Storage Service](./oss.html)** is supported by `flink-oss-fs-hadoop` and registered under the *oss://* URI scheme.
  The implementation is based on the [Hadoop Project](https://hadoop.apache.org/) but is self-contained with no dependency footprint.

  - **[Azure Blob Storage](./azure.html)** is supported by `flink-azure-fs-hadoop` and registered under the *wasb(s)://* URI schemes.
  The implementation is based on the [Hadoop Project](https://hadoop.apache.org/) but is self-contained with no dependency footprint.

To use a pluggable file systems, copy the corresponding JAR file from the `opt` directory to a directory under `plugins` directory
of your Flink distribution before starting Flink, e.g.

{% highlight bash %}
mkdir ./plugins/s3-fs-hadoop
cp ./opt/flink-s3-fs-hadoop-{{ site.version }}.jar ./plugins/s3-fs-hadoop/
{% endhighlight %}

> <span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> The plugin mechanism for file systems was introduced since Flink version `1.9` to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> The plugin mechanism for file systems was introduced in Flink version `1.9` to
```

support dedicated Java class loaders per file system and move away from class shading mechanism. You can still use the provided file systems

> (or your own implementations) via the old mechanism by copying corresponding JAR file into `lib` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(or your own implementations) via the old mechanism by copying the corresponding JAR file into `lib` directory.
```

> The non plugin-based loading mechanism is deprecated and will be not supported in the future. 

Reviewer: Are we actually removing support for having filesystems in lib?

Author: Not removing it now.
But in my understanding the plan (introducing and using plugins effort) is to move away from shared (lib based) class loader and shading.

Reviewer: OK, but "Not being supported" is a bit ambiguous; it could mean that it doesn't work at all, or that the Flink project provides no assistance for helping with issue resulting from placing filesystems in /lib.

There's also the MapR filesystem that cannot even be used as a plugin right now.

We could maybe rephrase it along the lines of discouraging the /lib approach for file systems that support the plugin mechanism.

Author: I don't know what is the plan with MapR.
To totally deprecate `/lib` based FS jars loading, MapR adapter also may probably need to become a separate plugin.

The main motivation to use plugins is to get rid of shading (and to allow those components to have their own versions of dependent libraries). Allowing to use the application class loader to load such components would be error-prone and not user friendly.

> OK, but "Not being supported" is a bit ambiguous

I've changed/re-phrased this paragraph, although the new version may sound not concrete too. 😄

* This will be replaced by the TOC
{:toc}

## Local File System

Flink has built-in support for the file system of the local machine, including any NFS or SAN drives mounted into that local file system.
It can be used by default without additional configuration. Local files are referenced with the *file://* URI scheme.

## Pluggable File Systems

Apache Flink project supports the following file systems as plugins:

>   - [**Amazon S3**](./s3.html) object storage is supported by two alternative implementations, `flink-s3-fs-presto` and `flink-s3-fs-hadoop`.

Reviewer 2: ... is supported by two alternative implementations: `flink-s3-fs-presto` and `flink-s3-fs-hadoop`.

  Both implementations are self-contained with no dependency footprint.

>   - **MapR FS** file system adapter is already supported in the main Flink distribution under the *maprfs://* URI scheme.

Reviewer: Do you still intend to re-structure the page to make the difference clearer for MapR? All of the benefits of plugins don't apply to the MapR filesystem.

Author: I've left some note in the document, that the MapR filesystem is exception compared to others.
There is also a discussion happening in the Flink dev mailing list to remove this FS from Flink distribution (jar).

  To use it when using Flink as a library, add the respective maven dependency (`org.apache.flink:flink-swift-fs-hadoop:{{ site.version }}`).
  
  - **[Aliyun Object Storage Service](./oss.html)** is supported by `flink-oss-fs-hadoop` and registered under the *oss://* URI scheme.
  The implementation is based on the [Hadoop Project](https://hadoop.apache.org/) but is self-contained with no dependency footprint.

  - **[Azure Blob Storage](./azure.html)** is supported by `flink-azure-fs-hadoop` and registered under the *wasb(s)://* URI schemes.
  The implementation is based on the [Hadoop Project](https://hadoop.apache.org/) but is self-contained with no dependency footprint.

To use a pluggable file systems, copy the corresponding JAR file from the `opt` directory to a directory under `plugins` directory
of your Flink distribution before starting Flink, e.g.

{% highlight bash %}
mkdir ./plugins/s3-fs-hadoop
cp ./opt/flink-s3-fs-hadoop-{{ site.version }}.jar ./plugins/s3-fs-hadoop/
{% endhighlight %}

<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> The plugin mechanism for file systems was introduced in Flink version `1.9` to

> support dedicated Java class loaders per plugin and move away from class shading mechanism.

Reviewer 2: and to move away from the class shading mechanism.

You can still use the provided file systems (or your own implementations) via the old mechanism by copying the corresponding
JAR file into `lib` directory.

> It's encouraged to use the plugin-based loading mechanism for file systems that support it. Loading file systems components from `lib`

Reviewer 2: Loading file system components from the `lib` directory ...

> directory may be not supported in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directory may not be supported in future versions.
```

Author: I've applied the second part: `... supported in future Flink versions`.
Using `may not` is not suitable here, as it means prohibiting something.

This registers `/path/to/etc/hadoop` as Hadoop's configuration directory and is where Flink will look for the `core-site.xml` and `hdfs-site.xml` files.

## Adding a new pluggable File System implementation

> 

Reviewer: This looks like it still valid and could be kept as is imo.

Author: I've removed it because it was not exact:
 * it is not, that `FileSystem` classes are discovered by Java's service loading mechanism, but `FileSystemFactory`;
 * there is still reference left to Java's service loading in the `Add a service entry` step.

Reviewer: Ok, given that this section is for developers of new filesystems I'm okay with the change.

File systems are represented via the `org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystem` class, which captures the ways to access and modify files and objects in that file system.

To add a new file system:

  - Add the File System implementation, which is a subclass of `org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystem`.
  - Add a factory that instantiates that file system and declares the scheme under which the FileSystem is registered. This must be a subclass of `org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystemFactory`.
  - Add a service entry. Create a file `META-INF/services/org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystemFactory` which contains the class name of your file system factory class
  (see the [Java Service Loader docs](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html) for more details).

> During plugins discovery, the file system factory class would be loaded by a dedicated Java class loader to avoid class conflicts with other plugins and Flink components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During plugin discovery, the file system factory class would be loaded by a dedicated Java class loader to avoid class conflicts with other plugins and Flink components.
```

> The same class loader should be used during file system instantiation and the file system operation calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same class loader will be used during file system instantiation and the file system operation calls.
```

> <span class="label label-warning">Warning</span> In practice, it means you should avoid using `Thread.currentThread().getContextClassLoader()` class loader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<span class="label label-warning">Warning</span> In practice, it means you must not use the ClassLoader returned by  `Thread.currentThread().getContextClassLoader()`
```

This registers `/path/to/etc/hadoop` as Hadoop's configuration directory and is where Flink will look for the `core-site.xml` and `hdfs-site.xml` files.

## Adding a new pluggable File System implementation

File systems are represented via the `org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystem` class, which captures the ways to access and modify files and objects in that file system.

To add a new file system:

  - Add the File System implementation, which is a subclass of `org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystem`.
  - Add a factory that instantiates that file system and declares the scheme under which the FileSystem is registered. This must be a subclass of `org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystemFactory`.
  - Add a service entry. Create a file `META-INF/services/org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystemFactory` which contains the class name of your file system factory class
  (see the [Java Service Loader docs](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html) for more details).

> During plugins discovery, the file system factory class would be loaded by a dedicated Java class loader to avoid class conflicts with other plugins and Flink components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During plugins discovery, the file system factory class will be loaded by a dedicated Java class loader to avoid class conflicts with other plugins and Flink components.
```

To add a new file system:

  - Add the File System implementation, which is a subclass of `org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystem`.
  - Add a factory that instantiates that file system and declares the scheme under which the FileSystem is registered. This must be a subclass of `org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystemFactory`.
  - Add a service entry. Create a file `META-INF/services/org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystemFactory` which contains the class name of your file system factory class
  (see the [Java Service Loader docs](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html) for more details).

During plugins discovery, the file system factory class will be loaded by a dedicated Java class loader to avoid class conflicts with other plugins and Flink components.
The same class loader should be used during file system instantiation and the file system operation calls.

<span class="label label-warning">Warning</span> In practice, it means you should avoid using `Thread.currentThread().getContextClassLoader()` class loader

> in your implementation. 

Reviewer 3: Do we want to elaborate on this? That `getContextClassLoader()` can be used inside `org.apache.flink.core.fs.FileSystemFactory#create(URI)`  call stack (however we are discouraging from using it anyway)?

Author: I'd prefer not to document it.
Currently the `create()` call has the class loader set only because there are some existing implementation that rely on it.
So far there is no proper reason why would FSs need it, they can explicitly use the correct class loader.

In the future, it should be possible to remove the additional setup of class loader for `create()` call.
